# Joseph Henrich, The Secret of Our Success: How Culture Is Driving Human Evolution, Domesticating Our Species, and Making Us Smarter

Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2016.

From the title one might mistake this volume for a self-help guide, but that is far from
the case. It is a scientific, non-technical, strongly argued explication of the role of culture in
shaping human existence, including yours and mine. It defines humans as a cultural species.

Everything we know is drawn from a collective brain, the sum total of human learning. We
don’t create culture—it creates us. Human evolution has been shaped by culture, which has
affected our biology, and in turn been incorporated through natural selection into our
genomes. All humans are innately configured to imbibe, absorb, inhale culture from infancy and
throughout our lives. In contrast to prevailing conceptions of ‘popular culture,’ Joseph Henrich
seeks to prove that it permeates our lives, the primary factor in determining who we are.

Henrich is Chair of the Department of Human Evolutionary Biology at Harvard. Originally
trained in cultural anthropology, he is apparently familiar with every anthropological study of
existing hunter-gatherer societies, including relatively isolated small-scale societies, and he has
studied several first-hand. Such groups, despite widely different beliefs and settings, reveal
fundamental cultural traits of the human species as well as variations in social customs and
values. Moreover, groupings of hunter-gatherers were the social organization of the genus
Homo until c. 10,000 years ago, and hence the context for our genetic evolution. Human
evolutionary biology draws upon paleo-archeology and -anthropology to interpret evidence of
early iterations of Homo. Modern cultural psychology provides another analytical lens for
elucidating the foundations of human behavior.

Henrich invokes paleo-archeology to make two fundamental points: The unique feature
of genus Homo is that cultural learning became cumulative, and cultural developments caused
genetic changes to Homo physiology. His clear, informative depiction of human evolution
explains both how and why humans developed as they did. Roughly 3 million years ago, the
earliest Homo species used stone tools for food preparation and hunting. In the next million
years the culture of tools and activities improved somewhat, then more consequential progress
was sporadic for another million years. But by 800,000 years ago, a full cultural repertoire of
tools, stone working, hunting, fishing, and cooking testified to the existence of a complex
culture made possible by cumulative learning. Henrich calls this “crossing the evolutionary
Rubicon, at which point cultural evolution became the primary driver of our species genetic
evolution.” 

Subsequent development was relatively rapid until Homo sapiens—us—
emerged some 100,000 years ago. This process produced substantial physiological change as
culture altered behaviors which natural selection encoded in genes, what Henrich calls culturegene coevolution. Processing food, for example, and especially cooking, favored the evolution 
of smaller teeth, mouths, jaw muscles, stomachs, and colons. These processes worked on
mental as well as physical evolution. Stone tools discovered from 2 million years ago indicated
that 90 percent of toolmakers were right-handed. Since apes have no preferred hand, this
indicated the beginning of brain-structure specialization, in which the right hemisphere
specialized in tools and languages (and the left in hand coordination), suggesting increasing
capacity to communicate and hence share culture. However, culture-gene coevolution shaped
social interactions as well.

As a cultural species, “humans are adaptive cultural learners who acquire ideas, beliefs,
values, social norms, motivations and worldviews from others in their communities.”
These processes are innate, “a consequence of genetically evolved psychological adaptations
for learning from other people. That is, natural selection favored genes for building brains with
abilities to learn from others.” The genetic basis for this capacity is evident in infants and
toddlers. By one year of age, infants exhibit cultural instincts to judge who best to learn from,
favoring successful and competent models as well as prestigious ones. Infants also recognize
mental states in others, including what is termed social referencing—seeking
approval/disapproval from authority figures. From infants to adults, individuals prefer to learn
from co-ethnics—people with similar ethnic markers and dialects—as well as from models of
the same sex.

A fundamental driver of cultural learning is social norms, the mechanism underlying
cooperation in human societies. Acquiring social norms is hard-wired into our psyches and
apparent from infancy. They imprint notions of how people should behave, which then become
enforced by others. Violations of social norms harm a person’s reputation—their standing in
society—with negative consequences ranging from unpopularity to ostracism. Abiding by social
norms promotes prosocial behaviors, which are the basis for forming community and
cooperation in all human societies. The process of adapting to life in society Henrich calls ‘selfdomestication’: i.e., becoming “norm learners with prosocial biases, norm adherers
internalizing key motivations, norm-violation spotters, and reputation managers.”

However, “human societies vary so much in the scale and intensity of their cooperation
because different societies have culturally evolved different social norms.”
Such differences have shaped cultural evolution through ‘intergroup competition.’ This
is Henrich’s generic term for conflict (war and raiding), differential group survival (through
ecological adaptation, migration and assimilation, or reproduction), and “prestige-based group
transmission.” Conflict appears to be ubiquitous in Homo evolution (and among Chimpanzees
too, our closest primate relative). Evidence from existing hunter-gatherers indicates that
warfare was continuous or frequent for 70-90 percent of cases, resulting directly in 13-15
percent of deaths. Earlier nomadic hunter-gatherers would have been more dispersed, and
possibly had less cause for conflict, but the archeological evidence leaves no doubt about the
omnipresence of violence. The agricultural revolution greatly increased the frequency and scale
of warfare, as did the subsequent conquest of Eurasia by farmer-herders. Henrich argues that 
conquests generally resulted in considerable genetic mixing, but victorious groups usually
imposed their cultures. Warfare no doubt was a factor in cultural evolution in the historical era,
but in prehistory intergroup competition more likely caused the natural selection of groups
possessing more effective social organization.

Cooperation and sociality, the indispensable features of social organization, are
dependent on culturally evolved social norms. “Various forms of intergroup competition, only
one of which involves violence, increasingly favored social norms that fostered success in this
competition, … norms that increase group size, solidarity, social interconnectedness,
cooperation, economic production, internal harmony, and risk taking….This would have favored
genes for prosocial psychology, prepared for negotiating a world where norms about harm and
fairness toward fellow community members were likely to be important.” Hence, the
traits and behaviors that bind societies are, like human faces, the result of culture-gene
coevolution.

However, the most distinctive dimensions of human culture affect our biology, not our
genes. Culture shapes human biology by altering brain architecture: “at the most basic level,
cultural learning shapes the reward circuitry in our brains so that we like and want different
things.” Henrich’s favorite example is reading, an activity that develops a specialized
“letterbox” in the left side of the brain and enhances the “information highway” that connects
the brain’s two hemispheres. But a large letterbox seems to reduce capacities for facial
recognition (a vital culture-gene coevolutionary endowment). Even big brains can’t do
everything.

The culture that shapes our brains is part of the collective brains—the knowledge
possessed by each society. Huge differences exist in collective brains. Small scale societies know
many things—how to track animals, detoxify foods, etc.—that rational moderns could never
figure out by themselves. But such collective brains are inherently limited. Early cultures had no
words for colors—just light and dark, unlike our eleven names for points on the color spectrum.
Similarly, such societies could only count: 1, 2, 3, many. Linguist have estimated the
vocabularies of small-scale societies to contain 3,000 to 5,000 words; whereas “an American
17-year-old knows 40-60,000 words.”  The rate of increase in collective brains—
cumulative cultural learning—will depend on the number of individuals capable of contributing
something and their social interconnectedness (mass × velocity). Under conditions of isolation
and shrinking populations, collective brains have been known to atrophy—losing important
cultural information.

Modern society, of course, presents the opposite situation. We download from our
collective brain “an immense repository of mental apps from a vast pool of culturally inherited
know-how and practices.” Examples include mathematics, time systems, 3D referencing,
and thousands more. Reading alone enhances cognitive abilities in unrelated areas. In complex
societies knowledge accumulation depends “on the size and interconnectedness of the
subpopulation at the knowledge frontier.”  We have maximized this condition, especially
by creating universities. In fact, rationalism may be the most valuable app in our collective
brain, the cultural factor driving our cumulative knowledge acquisition. Henrich omits
universities, but he seconds the “Flynn effect”—that each generation is becoming smarter. If
we measured IQ by contemporary scales, “in 1815 the average American would have an IQ
below 70.” In other words, the pace of cumulative learning is accelerating. We are
constantly generating more stuff to know, and individuals are probably absorbing increasing
portions of it—but within the parameters set by our ingrained, culturally shaped, mental
architecture.

What to make of all this? Henrich has provided a fascinating and erudite account of
human evolution, driven by the acquisition and cumulation of culture. Contemporary humans
are cultural neophytes in evolutionary terms. Large numbers have only been reading for the last
200 years, and until very recently they were a minority of humanity. While cultural learning of
social norms is anchored in our genes, we acquire enormous amounts of abstract knowledge of
all conceivable kinds. Hence, the promise of the book’s subtitle remains a challenge—how
culture not only makes us smarter, but adapts us for living in a what has become a knowledge
society?

Henrich addressed some of this in a subsequent book—The WEIRDest People in the
World, which refers to contemporary populations
that are Western, Educated, Industrialized, Rich, and Democratic. This volume focuses on their
cultural psychology—the internalized social norms that favor individualism, impersonal
prosocial institutions, and analytical thinking. Henrich merely alludes to how “psychological
dark matter” (social norms) made possible Enlightenment thinking—the application of
analytical thinking to the external world. Such rationalism is not a social norm, but a learned
mode of thought institutionalized particularly in universities and generating the ongoing
explosion of knowledge. University knowledge possesses unique authority because it is
objective—outside of any individual—and universal. In the 21st century, university knowledge
now defines society and progress in terms of rationalism and universalism. It dominates the global knowledge society because it is objectively superior to
alternatives, or as Henrich might put it, through “prestige-based group transmission.”

The conclusion addresses some of the implications of how cultural psychology affects a
global knowledge society predicated on university-style rationalism. Both are inescapable
realities. And at times they can conflict. Western reformers often seek to improve conditions in
underdeveloped societies by introducing rational practices, believing “that if people just have
the facts, they will behave in sensible ways”; whereas such “mini-causal models (‘the facts’) are
merely secondary” to acquired social norms.” More generally, given that “different
societies possess quite different … ways of reasoning, mental heuristics, motivations, and
emotional reactions. The imposition of new formal institutions imported from elsewhere … will
work rather differently, and perhaps not at all.” Weirdest People presents an extended 
comparison between Westerners and populations shaped by kinship-based psychologies, and
the tensions of the latter in dealing with Western institutions.

A larger issue is how to apply the perspectives of culture hegemony to modern Western
societies. Attempts to guide, modify, or channel human behaviors through laws, social policies,
or social scientific analyses rarely consider underlying cultures. As in non-Western societies,
these cultures are deeply rooted in ‘mental heuristics, etc.’ Henrich notes that people never
forget their mother tongue, which is deeply imprinted in infancy, but so are the social norms
underlying much behavior. Modern society tolerates an enormous range of cultural diversity,
and conformity should hardly be a preference, let alone a goal. However, social pathologies are
another matter. They need to be addressed in terms of the cultures they manifest and how
they were acquired or learned. This would include not just social norms, but motivations,
prestige models, third-party monitors, rewards, and sanctions. Henrich concludes, rather
optimistically, “people’s preferences and motivations are not fixed, and a well-designed
program or policy can change what people find desirable, automatic, and intuitive.” I am not
sure that The Secret of Our Success supports that conclusion, nor how applicable it is for
collectivities or societies. But it seems that culture in the comprehensive sense that Henrich
presents it is fundamental to understanding social phenomena—and possibly even for
improving them.
