# When Walking Away Is the ONLY Answer (A Hermit’s Philosophy)

Introduction

If these times endure, I shall become a hermit, For I see nothing here but grief and torment; 
Evils reign, good folk are held in scorn, And the wicked seize the seats of government. 
-- Eustache Deschamps

According to the legend, the sage Lao Tzu walked away from society after he wrote down the Tao Te Ching, the foundational 
text of Taoism. Some believe he wanted to live a simpler life and be closer to nature. Others 
say that Lao Tzu was tired of society’s moral decline and the power struggles he witnessed, 
so he intended to withdraw. Even though Lao Tzu’s life is cloaked in myth, these sentiments ascribed 
to him are all too human. Many people went before him and many after him, leaving society behind 
and spending their lives in seclusion. 

Throughout time, this peculiar desire 
of a small group of people to seclude themselves has persisted. To this day, 
some still long for profound solitude, which a hermit’s life can offer. Some still contemplate 
leaving behind a noisy society that, in their eyes, has nothing to offer worthy of lingering. 
What moved people in the past and present to become hermits? What does a life of seclusion 
offer? And is the hermit life possible today? Let’s explore the philosophy of the hermit. 

Renouncing society

It’s difficult to pinpoint the first hermits in human history, as we cannot be really sure when 
people started to seclude themselves. The ascetics of ancient India from the Vedic tradition go way 
back, most likely thousands of years. The Upanishads contain references to people who 
renounced society and sought spiritual practice in the forests, free from distractions. 
From the Christian tradition, we have the Desert Fathers and Mothers, such as St. Paul 
of Thebes and Amma Syncletica of Alexandria. In China, there’s still an active hermit culture, 
especially in the Zongnan mountains where many hermits reside today. Also, there have been 
philosophers who admired hermits and adopted a semi-hermit lifestyle, such as Henry David Thoreau 
and Thomas Merton. All in all, we must conclude that hermit life has persisted throughout the ages 
all around the world and still exists today. So, why do people become hermits? What drives 
them to leave society and spend their lives in solitude? 

To answer this question, I’m indebted to two primary sources: Peter France’s comprehensive 
book Hermits: The Insights of Solitude and a podcast episode by an impressive philosophy 
channel named Hermitix (link below). In the latter, expert and author Robert Rodriguez 
shares his knowledge, which was very helpful. For many hermits, pursuing spirituality has been 
one of the main reasons. For example, Taoist hermits sought to get closer to 
the Tao. But there’s another motivation that drives people to become hermits. 

Take the Desert Fathers, for example. They witnessed the merging of the Church and 
imperial power, which they considered detrimental to Christian values and 
their ability to practice their faith. Their decision to seclude themselves wasn’t 
just an appeal to a more spiritual life; they also wanted to escape the increasing corruption 
of faith and society. Doing so aligned them with Lao Tzu, who also felt dissatisfaction 
with court life. So, they turned their backs on the world and went off alone, exposing themselves 
to the harsh conditions of the desert. It’s not just seclusion but also a renunciation 
of society that characterizes hermits. As Rodriguez mentions, 
they realize they cannot change the world. But they can distance themselves from it. 

Whether it’s corruption, wicked people in the government, moral decay, or today’s 
self-exploiting achievement society: they’re done with it. It has nothing more to offer them. 

The juice simply isn’t worth the squeeze. Just look at the world today: tensions between 
powerful nations, deepening polarization, rampant greed, and a small group of ultrarich individuals 
holding most of the power. Have you had thoughts lately such as: “I don’t want to be part of this 
anymore” or “I wish I could just walk away from all this.” Well, you’re not alone. The 
renunciation of society is a universal phenomenon; the hermits have been doing it for ages! 

Based on their accounts, many hermits find their lives improving in solitude. Moreover, 
people consulted them for advice as long as they’ve been around. So, people sought 
guidance for living within society from those who turned their backs on it. That’s ironic, 
isn’t it? Apparently, people see something of value in the hermit’s existence. 

So, what makes the hermit’s life valuable? What do hermits find in solitude? Let’s explore this. 

The Priceless Joy of Seclusion

What’s so enticing about seclusion? Aren’t we social beings that need interaction with others? 
Or could seclusion be a good thing? What’s to find in profound solitude? Are there any 
benefits to a lack of human connection? Plenty of accounts tell of the joys and 
benefits of secluding oneself. Take, for example, the story of Christopher Knight, 
who disappeared in the woods and lived there for decades. The book A Stranger In The Woods gives an 
insight into his life. In solitude, Christopher found liberation from the noise of society and 
a rare form of inner peace. He also speaks of an almost symbiotic relationship with nature, 
a joyful experience described by Thoreau and something the Taoist hermits also seek. 

Escape from society’s noise and closeness to nature are advantages commonly experienced by 
hermits. Such conditions allow for a profound spiritual life and, in some cases, intellectual 
pursuit. Although Schopenhauer wasn’t a hermit, he avoided the crowds, allowing him to study and 
deepen his philosophy. Nietzsche used solitude to develop his philosophy, emphasizing it as a means 
for the Übermensch to rise above the herd. Rodriguez makes an interesting point and 
argument for the hermit life: the truth of impermanence. Let’s, for example, 
consider today’s consumerist society and what it pursues. It’s about chasing status, money, 
nice cars and houses, and other material stuff. People also seek friends and relationships; they 
want to belong and fit in. They keep up with the latest fashion and trends. They follow the news, 
which bombards them with doom and gloom 24/7. I’ve been reading a book by Rolf Dobelli called 
Stop Reading the News, which shows that most news is redundant information designed to catch our 
attention and generate profit and generally makes us feel anxious, angry, and unsafe. 

As the wisest of humanity justly observed, everything is temporary. The outside world 
is in constant flux. It all comes and goes. Yet, we constantly grasp and attach ourselves 
to the impermanent, causing all kinds of unpleasant emotions and depleting our 
energy. The hermit sees through this scheme. Therefore, he disentangles himself from these 
things. All these worldly concerns will not make him happy. On the contrary, they stand 
in the way of his happiness and well-being. Imagine the joy of avoiding pointless small talk, 
social pressure, and constantly having to fit in—a peace and calm that allows uninterrupted 
creative or spiritual pursuits. The worldly winds don’t ravage 
the Hermit’s domain, which makes it a haven of tranquility. From that haven, 
the hermit views society from the outside. It shows defects usually invisible from within. 

It shows the vanity of the herd’s chasings and puts worldly concerns in a different light. 
Is the hermit’s unique perspective perhaps why people consult them for advice? 
Now that we’ve reflected upon the good of seclusion, such as inner peace, getting 
closer to nature, the absence of societal noise, and detachment from the mundane, let’s put the 
hermit’s philosophy in a modern context. What’s it like to be a hermit today? Is there something like 
a modern hermit? Can we adopt certain aspects from the hermit’s lives to benefit our own? 

The Modern Day Hermit

Over the centuries, humanity has built large, complex societies interwoven in an increasingly 
globalizing world. We’ve never been so connected, and we’ve also never been exposed to so much 
information about practically anything on Earth and beyond. Although marginalized, 
the hermit has stood the test of time, and people who wish to seclude themselves still 
exist (perhaps even more than before). Today, the act of secluding oneself is 
generally seen as bad. From personal experience, I've noticed that when 
you isolate yourself from people, they assume something is wrong with you. 

The phenomenon of the hikikomori in Japan rejecting society, mental issues 
aside, is widely considered a problem. As the conversation with Rodriguez clarifies, 
today’s world generally offers little respect or support for hermits. It’s 
also challenging to emulate the classical hermit lifestyle in a practical sense. 
In most places, you need some legal ties—like an ID, taxes, or property. These things typically 
require having a bank account and a phone. While some degree of self-sufficiency is still possible, 
being truly off-grid and independent has become increasingly difficult. 

But current society also offers opportunities. Increasing technological advancements and 
individualism allow for a different kind of eremitism, a somewhat paradoxical one. 
Consider the ‘urban hermit’ (or city hermit). You’ll get different descriptions of this 
curious fellow when you search for urban hermit on Google. I stumbled upon an old Chinese proverb: 
“The mediocre hermit resides in the forest; the great hermit lives in the city.” This 
suggests it’s not only possible but perhaps more admirable to preserve 
solitude in a bustling urban environment. So, how does the modern city hermit live? 

By seeking seclusion amidst the crowd—alone in an apartment or house with minimal human 
contact. Again, this sounds paradoxical, but in today’s world, it actually makes sense. 

Hybrid Hermits

City life used to involve lots of social interactions. People had to go to work physically, 
and if they wanted to buy something, they had to visit these places called 
shops. Stuff like bank transactions or booking a trip happened in person. 

But times have changed. In many places, you can survive without ever leaving your house: 
an internet connection lets you shop, make money, handle banking, file taxes, et cetera. 
As part of the urban matrix, the city hermit isn’t self-sufficient, 
like a Taoist hermit with his mountain shack and vegetable garden. However, the system allows him 
to live with minimal human contact and, let’s face it, the convenience of the city. 

But for some, staying in a city or society they despise is unbearable, even as a hermit. They 
may be better off leaving—ideally to a distant culture. Being in a different culture creates 
distance from home. Tension and politics from your native country may be pretty irrelevant in 
another. In Indonesia, for example, the whole left-right nonsense is barely a thing, and few 
care about foreign politics. It’s a relief—and you don’t have to be a recluse to benefit. 

I’d even say that a digital nomad can adopt a hermit-like lifestyle. Again, 
I’m being self-referential here, but I have spent significant time abroad while working. I traveled 
slowly and only stayed in urban areas. In my experience, metropolises like Tokyo or 
Jakarta offer near-invisibility. Because there are so many people, 
you can easily disappear into the crowd. But what I believe nomad life uniquely adds to the 
semi-hermit experience is non-attachment to one’s surroundings. I was just a visitor. Culturally 
and linguistically, there was a distance between myself and my environment. This strangeness was 
already a form of seclusion, the invisible walls of unfamiliarity. Combined with the anonymity 
of the city, my urban hermit’s existence was round. And it was pretty adventurous, too. 

So, today’s world offers plenty of possibilities for those who thrive in 
solitude and seek disengagement from society. But before plunging into the secluded life, 
take caution. It’s not for everyone. And it’s especially not for those full of resentment, 
unable to let go of worldly affairs, which may turn solitude into a personal hell. 
Consider this saying from an unknown hermit from the stories of the Desert Fathers: 
“It is better to live among the crowd and keep a solitary life in your spirit than to live 
alone with your heart in the crowd.”
